<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>High Integrity Computing</title><link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css"/>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
</head>
<body>
<section class="frontmatter-rw Preface-rw" epub:type="frontmatter colophon">

<header>
<h1>Preface</h1>
</header>
<div class="block-rw extract-rw">
<p>“Once there was a little man, he was not wise<br/>
he really did built a new house on ice<br/>
but then the thaw came, it stopped freezing<br/>
and he lost his house and everything was sinking<br/>
o, o, o, right through the ice<br/>
cause the little man was not wise.” </p>
<p class="source-rw">—Dutch nursery rhyme</p>
</div>
<p>
This book is about building high integrity systems using commodity components. It is intended for software architects, designers and developers as well as engineers who want to know about the base theory of multi granularity high integrity system design, but who first and foremost want practical handles and examples for building such systems using the widely available systems and components that, by themselves, are known not to be watertight.
</p>
<p>
This book will try to teach you that what the nursery rhyme and common sense tells is complete foolishness can really make some sense. We are going to build ourselves that little house on the ice. Not because the ice is a particular good place to build a house on, in fact we have seen clear signs of thaw already, but because given the current information technology landscape the ice is in fact the only available place to build our house on, and this is not going to change any time soon.
</p>
<p>
My goal here is to make you appreciate and understand the useful non awkward properties, the good parts so to say, of systems that were not designed with security in mind, or systems that were designed as low granularity or perimeter security measures, and apply them in a practical way in the design and deployment of multi-granularity high integrity and least authority systems.
We are going to try to do this in a way that avoids the usability nightmares often associated with security mechanisms. We won't be able to fully avoid these inflexible and awkward parts of security, but we shall see that flexibility and usability do not need to be completely at odds with security.
You could say this book is a book about 'the good parts' of information security, and on how to use these good parts without getting entangled to much in the bad,  the awkward and the inflexible parts.
</p>
<p>
The systems this book will show you how to build will be flawed in that they are build on the shaky grounds that is inherent to using common but flawed commodity components. It will however teach you how to interlink the good parts of these flawed components at different levels of granularity in such a way to make our little house on the ice, unlike most of its components, safe enough to withstand all seasons.
</p>
</section></body></html>
